---
layout: post
title: Cognitive overconfidence from reminiscence of giving advice
date: 2021-12-23 22:00:00
description: The influence of empowering memories on anticipation of word recall task performance
tags: overconfidence memory-task priming giving-advice
categories: psychology
thumbnail: assets/img/20211223_00.jpg
---

*** This was an individual term project completed for an experimental psychology course (Fall 2021), developed under the guidance of a faculty member in the Dept. of Psychology at Seoul National Univ. The original work has since been translated and lightly edited to reflect on the ideas I was exploring at the time as a student.

<div class="row justify-content-sm-center mt-3">
    <div class="col-sm-5 mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.liquid loading="eager" path="assets/img/20211223_00.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
</div>
<div class="caption">
    Overconfidence in word recall from reminiscence of giving advice.
</div>

*** Looking back to my experiences of mentoring or tutoring middle and high school students, I noticed that the sole recalling of those sessions where I felt I was able to provide my mentees some kind of advice (including the less helpful ones) promoted self-esteem. I decided to find out if others had similar reactions, even to the extent of overconfidence.

-----

Most problems we face living in a dynamic world have no definite answers. To overcome such problematic situations, people often seek advice from those around them. By doing this, we can summarize the situation, brainstorm a variety of empirical solutions or approaches, and possibly come across an innovative breakthrough. Even if the advice does not prove helpful right away, the person-to-person interactions where the advisor and advisee share their thoughts may reinforce the motivation to face and overcome problems. Especially in an academic setting, people inevitably encounter situations where they must acquire knowledge unprecedented in their lives, leading to a frequent need of advice. Academic advice can be classified into two groups that regard either “academic motivation,” e.g. diligence and task persistence, or “academic ability,” e.g. mnemonic techniques and problem-solving strategies.

The existing literature on advice in academic settings centered on motivation. Advice giving on academic motivation, as reported by Eskreis-Winkler et al. (2018) and Eskreis-Winkler et al. (2019), is more beneficial to advice givers than advice takers, enhancing academic performance in the former. As opposed to these findings on motivational advice, academic ability-related advising, which might provide more practical assistance, needs more attention in research. Moreover, prior research on academic advice examined the effects of advising in an environment where at least some stimuli relevant to the advice given were still existent. For instance, Eskreis-Winkler et al. (2019) collected report card grades of motivational advice givers at the end of the same semester they gave advice in. In the long term, recalling memories of advice giving might influence task performance differently if the advice givers were consistently required in their everyday lives to exercise knowledge and skills irrelevant to what they advised in the past. Considering these aspects, it would be intriguing to investigate whether memories of giving advice regarding academic ability could potentially be retained completely.

Anecdotes of advice giving can be recalled not in its entirety but rather in terms of confidence and motivation. According to Eskreis-Winkler et al. (2018), giving advice raises confidence; however, excessive confidence may incorporate with memories of success, affecting task performance negatively (de Lucia, 2015; Forsyth et al., 2007). Since recalling experiences of advice giving was reported to increase perceived influence and sense of power (Schaerer et al., 2018), memories of advising could over-induce confidence as by looking back to successful moments in the past. It is questionable that reminiscence of giving advice on academic ability contributes solely to maintaining academic skills initially enhanced with advice giving, without reinforcing self-confidence.

To complement the above shortcomings in academic advice research, we asked whether reminiscence of giving advice induces overconfidence. Specifically, we evaluated the effects of recalling anecdotes of advising mnemonic techniques on over-prediction of future memory task performance. Participants were assigned to either the control or the experimental group, and each group completed a memory task after recalling vacation memories or experiences of giving advice on memorization, respectively. At completion of the memory task, we questioned the participants about their predictions on the number of correct answers they would provide if they were to undergo another similar task in the near future. Giving advice would reinforce the belief that one is an “influential person” and be remembered like successful moments. In other words, the fact that one “gave advice” would have left a greater impression than the exact mnemonic techniques they advised about. Therefore, we expected that although the experimental group’s mnemonic techniques or skills were not to noticeably improve after the recalling session, this group would over-predict future task performance based on self-confidence only. With this rationale, we hypothesized that reminiscence of giving advice leads to overconfidence in task performance.

-----

Method

Prior to the experimental procedure, we employed G*Power to calculate the adequate sample size for the experimental design (Faul et al., 2007). At least 126 participants were required to yield a Cohen’s d of 0.5 with 80% power (two-tailed, alpha = .05).

Participants: We recruited 54 college students in their twenties. The average age for the participants was 21.0 (SD = 1.64), and there were 17 males and 37 females.

Tasks and Stimuli: Participants initially underwent a recall task to let the experimental group reminisce of advice giving. Akin to de Lucia (2015) and Schaerer et al. (2018), participants were instructed to freely think of memories relevant to an assigned topic and write a description of those memories. The recall topics for control and experimental groups were “memories from a vacation” and “memories of giving advice on memorization,” respectively.

To assess the overconfidence from recalling memories of giving advice, participants were assigned a cognitive task where they memorize foreign language vocabulary. We randomly selected 50 words from core entries in the Abenaki-English dictionary from Day (1994). The Abenaki language is an endangered language, minimizing the effect of the participants’ prior knowledge of foreign languages. The meaning of each word was provided as Korean translations of the corresponding English entries in Day (1994). The task comprised of a “learning phase” and a “testing phase.” In the learning phase, participants memorized the 50 Abenaki-Korean word pairs for five minutes without writing them down. In the testing phase, 25 among the 50 pairs were randomly selected, and participants were given only the Korean meaning in each pair. Then, the participants were given 2.5 minutes to answer the corresponding Abenaki word for each Korean meaning entry.

Assessment Tools: We evaluated the vividity of memories that the participants accessed in the recall task by employing a five-point scale question akin to de Lucia (2015). Participants indicated the item closest to how vivid their memories were, among “could not envision anything (0 points)” to “vivid as if just before my eyes (4 points).” For the experimental group, we inquired how influential the advice given was in the participants’ memories. Subjective influence was assessed by two seven-point scale questions akin to Schaerer et al. (2018). Participants indicated the item closest to the extent they agreed to the following questions, among “strongly disagree (0 points)” to “strongly agree (6 points)”: “Would the advice taker have carefully listened to your advice?” and “Would the advice taker have put your advice to action?”

We examined participants’ predictions of their performance on a prospective similar task to assess overconfidence in the cognitive task on foreign language vocabulary memorization. Following Fischer & Oppenheimer (2021), we instructed participants to provide the predicted number of correct answers if they were to be tested after a similar learning experience. We additionally evaluated self-confidence and performance prediction for the current task. For self-confidence, we employed a five-point scale question akin to de Lucia (2015) immediately before the cognitive task. Participants indicated the item closest to the extent they felt confident in the following learning and testing sessions, among “strongly unconfident (0 points)” to “strongly confident (4 points).” Performance prediction for the current task was assessed by collecting the predicted number of correct answers for the testing session before and after the cognitive task.

Procedure: The experiment took place individually in a remote setting, and participants were randomly assigned to the control or experimental group. We provided all participants with a written description of the experimental procedure. Following the introduction of the study as an investigation of vocabulary learning in a controlled environment, the experimental group was asked if they had prior experience of giving advice on memorization. This question was to select only the participants who had advice-giving experience that they could recall in the subsequent procedure, excluding data from those who did not have such experience. The participants then underwent the recall task for five minutes, during which we explained that a customized vocabulary learning task would be developed based on information given in the prior steps. Immediately after the recall task, participants answered one question about the vividity of recall. The experimental group answered two more questions about the subjective influence of their advice. After this step, participants reported their self-confidence and predicted their performance for the following cognitive task, one question for each. The cognitive task totaled 7.5 minutes in duration: five minutes of learning phase and 2.5 minutes of testing phase. At completion of the cognitive task, participants predicted their performance for the testing phase as well as their future performance on a similar task to measure overconfidence, one question for each.

Statistics: We employed Student’s t-test to confirm that reminiscence of giving advice leads to overconfidence. Before analysis, we excluded seven participants who reported not having prior experience of academic advice and three participants who did not follow the experimental procedure adequately.

-----

Results

To examine the effect of recalling experience of giving advice on overconfidence, Student’s t-test was applied to the number of correct answers in the testing session along with the participants’ predictions on future performance on a similar task. There was no significant difference between the control and experimental group in the number of correct answers in the testing session. However, the predicted number of correct answers in a prospective similar test was significantly higher in the experimental group (t(42) = 2.19, p = .018, d = 0.66). Meanwhile, the experimental group had a significant difference between the number of correct answers in the testing session and future performance prediction, which was non-existent in the control group (t(21) = 2.97, p = .004, d = 0.63). The finding that the experimental group over-predicts future task performance implies that reminiscence of giving advice induces overconfidence.

<div class="row justify-content-sm-center mt-3">
    <div class="col-sm-5 mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.liquid loading="eager" path="assets/img/20211223_01.png" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
</div>
<div class="row justify-content-sm-center mt-3">
    <div class="col-sm-6 mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.liquid loading="eager" path="assets/img/20211223_02.png" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
</div>
<div class="caption">
    (up) Number of correct answers in the testing phase of the current cognitive task (Current Task) and predictions on future performance on a similar task (Future Prediction). Participants were instructed to answer in integers between 0 and 25 (total number of word pairs given). The superscripts indicate statistical significance at p < .05 in the corresponding entries. Outliers are included, but excluding them does not alter significance. (down) Boxplot of the above data. * and ** indicate statistical significance at p < .05 and p < .01, respectively.
</div>

Student’s t-test was applied to the participants’ self-confidence and performance prediction for the current task to explore the factors contributing to overconfidence shown above. The experimental group exhibited significantly high levels of self-confidence and prior prediction of the number of correct answers in the testing session, compared to the control group (t(42) = 3.47, p < .001, d = 0.56; t(42) = 3.13, p = .002, d = 0.96). On the contrary, the post-testing prediction of the number of correct answers did not differ between experimental conditions and did not significantly differ from the actual number of correct answers in each group. The above results demonstrate that the experimental group, having recalled experience of giving advice, positively predicted their performance on the imminent cognitive task with high self-confidence. Post-testing performance evaluation of the already completed task, however, is less likely to exhibit such positive prediction.

<div class="row justify-content-sm-center mt-3">
    <div class="col-sm-7 mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.liquid loading="eager" path="assets/img/20211223_03.png" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
</div>
<div class="caption">
    Self-confidence index and performance predictions of the participants regarding the current cognitive task. Self-confidence was measured prior to the task (Pre-testing Self-confidence). Participants were instructed to answer in a five-point scale (0–4 points) as listed in the method section. Higher scores mean higher self-confidence. Performance predictions were assessed as expected number of correct answers either before and after the task (respectively Pre-testing and Post-testing Prediction). Participants were instructed to answer in integers between 0 and 25 (total number of word pairs given). The superscripts indicate statistical significance at p < .05 in the corresponding entries. Outliers are included, but excluding them does not alter significance.
</div>

We employed correlation analyses between the experimental group’s predictions on future performance and either the vividity of recall or subjective influence of advice giving. We expected that this would aid in further characterizing the relationship between the experimental group’s recall task and their overconfidence. Indeed, the vividity of recall and subjective influence of advice giving both were significantly correlated with the experimental group’s predicted number of correct answers in a prospective similar test (r(20) = .57, p = .006; r(20) = .63, p = .002). In the control group, such a relationship did not exist between vividity of recall and future performance prediction. This implies that higher overconfidence occurs when the memories of giving advice are more vivid or when one feels that their advice was more influential to the advice taker.

The experimental group’s vividity of recall and subjective influence of advice giving were not significantly correlated with the actual number of correct answers in the cognitive task. There were no significant differences between experimental conditions in vividity of recall. These results imply that there is a minimal possibility of factors irrelevant to the recall topic in the recall task design acting as confounding variables in the following procedure.

-----

Discussion

This study aimed to investigate whether reminiscence of giving advice induces overconfidence by comparing with the control group the performance predictions of the experimental group, who recalled advice-giving experiences on memorization, on a prospective task. The experimental group’s numbers of correct answers in the assigned cognitive task were not significantly different from the control group; however, the experimental group anticipated higher scores if they were to undergo another similar task in the near future. The excessive self-confidence on future task performance expressed in the experimental group, exceeding their capabilities demonstrated in the assigned task, supports our hypothesis that reminiscence of giving advice leads to overconfidence.

In follow-up analyses of the overconfident experimental group, these participants were more self-confident about and predicted better performance in the imminent cognitive task. This increased self-confidence and self-assurance may have been conveyed into over-prediction of future performance. Thus, recalling experiences of giving advice would have provoked overconfidence in the participants’ perception of the assigned cognitive task, resulting in overevaluation of future performance even after the assigned task. It is notable that both experimental groups provided less correct answers in the testing session than they anticipated prior to the cognitive task. Participants in both groups acknowledged their poor-than-expected results, as shown in the post-testing prediction of the number of correct answers. Since the experimental group over-predicted future performance despite their acknowledgement of subpar scores in the assigned task, we confirmed that the overconfidence from advice-giving experience is retained in a robust manner.

Moreover, correlation analyses demonstrated stronger overconfidence in the experimental group when the advice-giving memories accessed in the recall task were more vivid. Considering that vividity of recall had no significant correlation with actual scores in the testing session, it is suggested that the experimental group reminisced their advice-giving experience with a focus on self-assurance rather than the contents of the anecdotes themselves. Higher overconfidence also occurred in participants who reported that their advice would have proved more influential to the advice taker. We can infer from these findings that sole experiences of giving advice, like successful memories, strengthen the belief that one is an “influential person” and imprint major positive impressions on one’s sense of self-assurance.

The above analysis results converge on the implication that giving advice on academic ability is remembered as an opportunity for enhanced subjective influence and less about the knowledge conveyed through advising, leading to overconfidence in the long term. People are commonly requested to give academic advice because of their outstanding academic ability or clever studying strategies. Even in instances where this is not the case, giving advice improves self-esteem via the perception that the advice giver “knows more information than” the advice taker and is also beneficial in establishing positive self-identity, i.e. “a person skilled in aspects relevant to the advice given.” As the advice-giving anecdote moves farther into the past, one’s relevant academic ability may not be further developed due to lack of personal effort or environmental cues; therefore, one may have difficulties in remembering the strategies they exercised on future occasions. However, the memory of advice giving itself is consistently retained as a supportive rationale of the past self, a person “more knowledgeable and more skilled than others.” This overevaluation of the past self as an influential person who was asked to give advice may be what resulted in self-confidence and self-assurance exceeding current capabilities. This overconfidence, as this study suggests, could be maintained moving forward without encountering a drastic failure.

The effect of reminiscence of giving advice on overconfidence described in this study is in line with existing literature asserting that memories of success, along with excessive self-confidence, impedes task performance (de Lucia, 2015; Forsyth et al., 2007). The implications that advice-giving experience imprints in self-concept based on subjective influence support research findings on the increase of perceived influence and sense of power (Schaerer et al., 2018). Different from advice related to academic motivation, which could be easily kept as a desirable habit, people giving advice regarding academic ability should exercise relevant skills to further enhance and maintain it. This suggests that further clarifications are required to expand prior conclusions on motivational advice and self-confidence, in Eskreis-Winkler et al. (2018) and Eskreis-Winkler et al. (2019), to include academic ability-related advice. Additional strategies other than cooperating by exchanging advice may assist in consistent improvement and practice of academic ability. Here, we propose the possibility of long-term overconfidence provocation by giving advice with possible contributing factors. These findings are favorable of plausible shortcomings in learning methods that involve advice giving.

More comprehensive research including various skill domains will aid in generalizing the above discussion, considering that the two experimental groups and mnemonic technique assessment incorporated in the study design may limit our scope of observed effect. Further studies should focus on advice regarding critical thinking or problem-solving skills, both more complex than memorization, and even academic motivation. Prospective comparisons could also evaluate experimental groups who gave advice instead of recalling advice-giving, who recalled experience of receiving advice, or who received advice. Among the variables, post-testing performance predictions immediately followed the test session, allowing participants to infer the number of correct answers in the memory task without much effort. A longitudinal study would measure perceived task performance after a period as well as control for the time elapsed between advice giving and recalling that occasion. Furthermore, practical findings on the memory and recall circuits of advice-giving experience will lead to effective learning models based on advice giving and a more extensive understanding of advice-giving behavior itself.

Human life exists as an inevitable constituent of society and environment, and there is no identical problem in such dynamic settings with a myriad of variables. In this sense, exchanging advice when facing challenges could be seen as a fit behavioral trait to draw the most rational conclusions grounded by empirical solutions from many. However, even if one collects so many opinions from others, it is that person themselves that establishes desirable strategies, overcomes challenging problems, and grows to be a better person. If one possesses exceptional assets worth advising others to develop, one should not reside in influencing others, putting personal effort in constantly refining those skills. We hope more specific research on the long-term effects of advice giving and its contribution to overconfidence to maximize academic motivation and ability enhancement through advice.

-----

References

Day, G. M. (1994). Western Abenaki dictionary: Volume 1: Abenaki-English. Ottawa: University of Ottawa Press.

de Lucia, L. (2015). Priming memories: Effects on motivation and confidence. The Huron University College Journal of Learning and Motivation, 53(1), 34–83.

Eskreis-Winkler, L., Fishbach, A., & Duckworth, A. L. (2018). Dear Abby: Should I give advice or receive it?. Psychological Science, 29(11), 1797–1806.

Eskreis-Winkler, L., Milkman, K. L., Gromet, D. M., & Duckworth, A. L. (2019). A large-scale field experiment shows giving advice improves academic outcomes for the advisor. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 116(30), 14808–14810.

Faul, F., Erdfelder, E., Lang, A.-G., & Buchner, A. (2007). G*Power 3: A flexible statistical power analysis program for the social, behavioral, and biomedical sciences. Behavior Research Methods, 39(2), 175–191.

Fischer, M., & Oppenheimer, D. (2021). Harder than you think: How outside resistance leads to overconfidence. Psychological Science, 32(4), 598–610.

Forsyth, D. R., Lawrence, N. K., Burnette, J. L., & Baumeister, R. F. (2007). Attempting to improve the academic performance of struggling college students by bolstering their self-esteem: An intervention that backfired. Journal of Social and Clinical Psychology, 26(4), 447–459.

Schaerer, M., Tost, L. P., Huang, L., Gino, F., & Larrick, R. (2018). Advice giving: A subtle pathway to power. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 44(5), 746–761.